The last few videos, we looked at the basics of Web services. We understood the key terminology which
are associated with web services. In this video, we will take a quick look at the different types of
web services, kinds of web services, groups of web services.
However, you'd want to call them. SOAP and REST. One thing to remember is the fact that SOAP and
REST are not really comparable.
It's not really an apple to apple comparison.
REST defines an architectural approach.
Whereas SOAP poses restrictions on the format of XML which is exchanged between your service provider and
the service consumer.
Let's get started with SOAP. SOAP stands for Simple Object Access Protocol.
Actually it no longer stands for Simple Object Access Protocol.
It's no longer an abbreviation anymore. SOAP is just like a request response. Any of those terms.
SOAP is just a term. SOAP defines a specific way of building web services. In SOAP we use XML as
the request exchange format.
So I have a Facebook application which is talking to TODO application.
Facebook is sending a XML request and TODO application is sending back an XML response.  An example
of a request is shown below.  Get course details request.
So this is using again XML.
Is this SOAP? Are Facebook and TODO applications communicating using SOAP.
Nope.
This is not sufficient to be SOAP.
Important thing is SOAP defines a specific XML request and response structure.
If you're using SOAP then you have to use this structure. So you have to create a SOAP and envelope which
contains a SOAP header and a SOAP body.
The header contains meta information like authentication, authorization, signatures and things like
that.
Body is where you really put the real content of your request or your response.
So if you're actually saying you are creating a SOAP web service then you have to adhere to this request
and response format.
You should use a SOAP envelope with a header and a body in the request and the response.
So if you're using soap web services then Facebook and TODO application have to communicate using a SOAP
XML requests and a SOAP XML response. And example response is shown in here. So you have a SOAP envelope.
You have a header.
Here the header is empty.
You have a body with the content of the response.
When we look at the big picture SOAP defines a format for your request and the response. SOAP does not pose
any restrictions on your transport.
You can either use HTTP or MQ. So you can communicate over the web, over the Internet or you can use queues
to communicate as well.
And in SOAP, the service definition is typically done using something called web service definition.
Language. WSDL. Web service definition language.
A WSDL defines the end point. Basically where your service is exposed at. It defines all the operations that
are exposed.
Get all codes details, add a new course, delete course.
So what are all the operations that are allowed.
And also it specifies the request and response structure.
If I want to get all the details of a course, how do I send the request. If I want to delete a course,
How do I send a request?
And what kind of response can I expect?
WSDL is the service definition for your SOAP
Services. We will talk about all the details of a WSDL later in the course when we talk about SOAP
services in detail.
In summary, SOAP is all about adhering to the services XML structure. Adhering to the envelop header and
the body.
Once you have your request and response in that structure then you can say you are developing.
SOAP web services. Now that we talk a lot about the SOAP Web services. In the next video,
we would be talking about REST web services. Until then, bye-bye.